1.1.1 CIS2 Authentication Prescribers can authenticate themselves through the Care Identity Service using their NHS provisioned CIS2 authenticator.  This lets prescribers access Spine services like EPS. . Related docs: Care Identity Service . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-001 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-002 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-003 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test CIS2 Onboarding Documentation

1.1.2 RBAC Controls Role-based access controls (RBAC) must be used to limit what users of the prescribing system can and cannot do.   RBAC rules are in the National RBAC Database. . Related docs: RBAC Implementation Guidance for EPS . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-001 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-002  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-003 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.2.1 Prescribers can view a patient's nominated dispensing site Prescribers must be able to view details of the patient's existing nominated dispensing sites (for Secondary Care Suppliers this can be when the Clinician is prescribing).  See Helpful Documentation for information on what is required. . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service (EPS) prescribing developer guide - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-039 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.2.2 Searching for dispensing sites through the Directory of Healthcare Services (Service Search) API Prescribers must be able to find and validate dispensing sites for the patient from the Directory of Healthcare Services (Service Search) API. . Related docs: Directory of Healthcare Services (Service Search) API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Response in SCAL required . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.2.3 The system validates that a site is an EPS dispensing site When dispensing site ODS codes are entered manually, the system must use the relevant Directory of Healthcare Services (Service Search) API to validate them.  The site must be a valid EPS dispensing site. . Related docs: Directory of Healthcare Services (Service Search) API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-043 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-044 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.2.4 Prescriber viewing patient's nominated Dispensing Appliance Contractor (DAC) If a patient has a nominated DAC, the dispensers' names and ODS codes must be clearly visible when prescribing.  P1 and P2 prescription nominations are both visible. . Related docs: ODS . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-039 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.2.5 Changing the patient's nominated dispensing site Prescribers can add, update, or remove a patient's nomination on PDS at the patient's request.  Prescribers can change:  * the dispenser's ODS code * the type of dispenser . Related docs: PDS . Risk Logs: Covered in PDS assurance . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.2.6 Nominating a dispensing doctor on behalf of the patient For Primary Care Suppliers only:  Prescribers can nominate a dispensing doctor on behalf of the patient.  The nominations must only happen at the dispensing doctor's practice. They must not happen remotely.  Dispensing doctors' ODS codes are not available on the Directory of Healthcare Services (Service Search) API. . Related docs: Directory of Healthcare Services (Service Search) API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-PRI-004 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.3.1 For patients that have died Do not create a prescription using EPS for patients that have been marked as deceased on PDS. . Related docs:  . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-006 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-018 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.3.2 For patients who have a 'sensitive status' set on PDS Do not create a prescription using EPS for patients that have a sensitive status on PDS. . Related docs: Management of NHS Numbers and PDS Records - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-005  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-018 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.3.3 For prescribing Schedule 1 controlled drugs Schedule 1 controlled drugs must not be prescribed using EPS. . Related docs: The Misuse of Drugs Regulations 2001 (legislation.gov.uk) . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-011  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-018 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.3.4 For sites that aren't EPS compliant Paper FP10s must be used for patients with the following EPS exception codes:  * 1034851000000105 for a cross-border patient * 1034941000000103 for dispensing GPs that are not yet compliant with EPS (for Primary Care Suppliers only)  The system will record these patient preferences using the SNOMED-CT coding system locally. . Related docs:  . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-PRI-001  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-018 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.3.5 For medication that is not listed within dm+d Medication not listed within the dm+d must not be prescribed via EPS.  FP10s must be used to prescribe items that are not in the dm+d and are not mapped to the dm+d from a local proprietary database.  In these cases, medication may be split across electronic and FP10 prescriptions. . Related docs: dm+d . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-011  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-014  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-015  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-018 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.4.1 Creating a unique prescription ID The system must be able to generate both short-form and long-form prescription identifiers and these must be unique.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'Short-form Prescription ID' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-009 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.4.2 A prescriber could be able to choose from the 3 prescription treatment types when prescribing in Secondary Care Prescribers can choose whether the prescription treatment type is:   0001 Acute (Mandatory) 0002 Repeat Prescribing (optional for Secondary Care Suppliers depending on user case) 0003 Electronic Repeat Dispensing (eRD) (optional for Secondary Care Suppliers depending on user case) . Related docs:  . Risk Logs: Response in the SCAL required . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.4.3 Prescribers can create multiple prescriptions in a single interaction A prescriber can open and create multiple prescriptions and is not limited to creating one prescription at a time. . Related docs:  . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-008 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.4.4 The system must capture the correct English prescription type on the prescription. The system captures the prescription type for reimbursement as per the NHS Business Service Authority (BSA) vocabulary.  This will be a combination of a code and text. For example, '0101 - Primary Care Prescriber Ð Medical Prescriber'. . Related docs: See 'Electronic Prescription Service Guidance for Endorsement' for more information . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-036 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.4.5 The system must capture the correct Welsh prescription type on the prescription. For suppliers creating a Welsh Prescribing System only:  Prescribing systems used in Wales will also need to support the newly introduced Welsh prescription type codes.  This will be a combination of a code and text. For example, '0201 - Primary Care Prescriber - Medical Prescriber (Wales)'. . Related docs: See 'Electronic Prescription Service Guidance for Endorsement' for more information . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-036 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.4.6 A prescription must include the date when it is valid from The prescription must include the date it's valid from. This includes prescriptions that are dated in the future, sometimes known as post-dated prescriptions.  All prescription messages must be sent to $process-message   For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'validityPeriod' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-028 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.5.1 Who the Requester is on a prescription The Requester of a prescription is the prescriber creating and signing the prescription. These details must be populated when the prescription is signed. . Related docs: Reimbursement model guidance . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-035 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.5.2 Requester's SDS role profile ID The prescription includes the Requester's SDS role profile ID.   This can be taken from their NHS provisioned CIS2 authenticator.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'SDS role profile ID' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-035  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-040 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.5.3 Requester's SDS job role code The prescription includes the Requester's SDS job role code.   This can be taken from their NHS provisioned CIS2 authenticator.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'SDS job role code' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-035 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.5.4 Requester's professional code The prescription includes the Requester's professional code.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'professional codes' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: List of Professional Codes . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-035 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.5.5 Requester's SDS user identifier The prescription includes the Requester's SDS user idenitifier.   This can be taken from their NHS provisioned CIS2 authenticator.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'SDS User Identifier' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-035  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-039 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.5.6 Requester's name The prescription includes the Requester's name.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'The prescriber's name' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-035 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.7.4 Requester's telecom details The prescription includes a telephone number, which is the only supported telecom method. This can be the requesters direct line or organisations telephone number  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'The telephone number associated with the organisation' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-035 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.5.7 Timestamp when the prescription was signed The system must capure the date and time the prescription was signed.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'The time the prescription was signed.' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-035 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.5.8 Adding the Requester's advanced electronic signature to the prescription The system must capture the advanced electronic signature on the prescription.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'Advanced Electronic Signature' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-035 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.6.1 Who the Responsible Practitioner is on a prescription The Responsible Practitioner of a prescription must always be the prescriber or service clinically responsible for prescriptions at a prescribing site. . Related docs: Reimbursement model guidance . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-036  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-037 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.6.2 Responsible Practitioner's professional code The prescription includes the responsible practitioner professional code.  This can be their:  * DIN Number * Spurious Code * General Medical Council (GMC) number * Nursing and Midwifery Council (NMC) number  * General Pharmaceutical Council (GPhC) number * Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC) number  This will be held locally.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'professional codes' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: List of Professional Codes . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-036  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-037 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.6.3 Responsible Practitioner's name The prescription includes the Responsible Practitioner's name.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'prescriber's name' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-036 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-037 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.7.1 What is the prescribing organisation The prescribing organisation is the site which the Requester and Responsible Practioner is prescribing from. . Related docs:  . Risk Logs:  . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.7.2 The prescribing orgainisation's name The prescription must have the name of the prescribing organisation.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'Organisation name' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-036  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-037 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.7.3 The prescribing organisation's ODS Code The prescription must have the ODS code of the prescribing organisation.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'An array containing the ODS code of the organisation' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-036  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-037 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.7.5 Name of the prescribing managing organisation The prescription for Primary Care must have the name of the ICB that the prescribing organisation is part of.  The prescription for Secondary Care must have the name of the Trust the prescribing organisation is part of.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'managing organisation' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-036  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-037 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.7.6 ODS Code of the prescribing managing organisation The prescription for Primary Care must have the ODS Code of the ICB that the prescribing organisation is part of.  The prescription for Secondary Care must have the ODS Code of the Trust the prescribing organisation is part of.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'managing organisation' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-036  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-037 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.8.1 Adding the patient's NHS number Prescriptions may only be able to be created for patients who have a valid NHS number.  The prescription must have the patient's NHS number.  Note: For Secondary Care Suppliers it will be agreed prior to your EPS onboarding with our team if the sites Patient Administration System (PAS) has sufficient integration with PDS, or if you will need to complete separate PDS onboarding.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'patient's NHS number' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Personal Demographics Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-010  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-022 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.8.2 Adding the patient's name The prescription must have the patient's usual name only.  Note: For Secondary Care Suppliers it will be agreed prior to your EPS onboarding with our team if the sites Patient Administration System (PAS) has sufficient integration with PDS, or if you will need to complete separate PDS onboarding.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'list of names' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Personal Demographics Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-010  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-022 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.8.3 Adding the patient's gender The prescription must have the patient's gender.  Note: For Secondary Care Suppliers it will be agreed prior to your EPS onboarding with our team if the sites Patient Administration System (PAS) has sufficient integration with PDS, or if you will need to complete separate PDS onboarding.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'gender held in PDS' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Personal Demographics Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-010  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-022 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.8.4 Adding the patient's date of birth The prescription must have the patient's date of birth.  Note: For Secondary Care Suppliers it will be agreed prior to your EPS onboarding with our team if the sites Patient Administration System (PAS) has sufficient integration with PDS, or if you will need to complete separate PDS onboarding.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'birthDate' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Personal Demographics Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-010  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-022 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.8.5 Adding the patient's address The prescription must have the patient's home or temporary address on the prescription only. This information will come from PDS records.  Note: For Secondary Care Suppliers it will be agreed prior to your EPS onboarding with our team if the sites Patient Administration System (PAS) has sufficient integration with PDS, or if you will need to complete separate PDS onboarding.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'List of addresses' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Personal Demographics Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-010  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-022 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.8.6 Adding the patient's telecom details The prescription must have the patient's telephone number, which is the only supported telecom method.  The patient's telephone number can be maintained locally or by using the telephone number from the telecom record in PDS. This is because problems with synchronisation can delay clinical action.  Note: For Secondary Care Suppliers it will be agreed prior to your EPS onboarding with our team if the sites Patient Administration System (PAS) has sufficient integration with PDS, or if you will need to complete separate PDS onboarding.  For information on what type of information is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'Telecom' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Personal Demographics Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-010  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-022 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.8.7 Adding the general practice (not practitioner) with which the patient is or was registered (if available) The prescription must have the ODS code of the general practice (not practitioner) the patient is registered with. However, if this information is not within the patientÕs PDS record, it is okay to submit this as blank.  Note: For Secondary Care Suppliers it will be agreed prior to your EPS onboarding with our team, if the sites Patient Administration System (PAS) has sufficient integration with PDS or if you will need to complete separate PDS onboarding.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'general practice' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Personal Demographics Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-010  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-022 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.9.1 Add the ODS code of the patients nominated dispenser A nominated prescription must contain the ODS code of the patient's chosen dispensing site. . Related docs: Nominating a dispenser - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-020 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.9.2 Add the dispenser type for the prescription The type of dispensing site the patient has chosen must be identified on a nominated prescription.  This will be either:  P1 - other (community pharmacy etc.) P2 - Dispensing Appliance Contractors (DACs) P3 - dispensing doctor (not required for Secondary Care Suppliers) . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service (EPS) prescribing developer guide - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-020 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.9.3 Dispensing Appliance Contractors (DAC) dispenser type can only dispense appliances from their site type Prescriptions with a nominated DAC must only contain medical devices. . Related docs: The National Health Service (Pharmaceutical and Local Pharmaceutical Services) Regulations 2013 (legislation.gov.uk) . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-012 (items in clinical test pack) . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.9.4 Creating a non-nominated prescription Where necessary, a prescriber must be able create a prescription without a nomination, i.e. a non-nominated prescription. . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service Ð non-nominated prescriptions - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-043  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-044 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.9.5 Creating a one-off nominated prescription Where necessary, the prescriber must be able to apply a one-off nomination to the prescription. It is only considered to be a one-off prescription if you use a different ODS code to what is stored as the patient's nomination in PDS.  This is useful if, for example, the patient is on holiday and needs to collect their prescription from a dispenser that's local to them.  One-off nominations must only apply to a single prescription, and do not change the patient's usual nomination. . Related docs: NHS England È Electronic prescription service (EPS) - One-off nominations . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-043  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-044 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.9.6 Confirming the one-off nominated site The one-off nomination must be confirmed as an EPS enabled dispensing site capable of dispensing the requested medication or device. . Related docs: Directory of Healthcare Services (Service Search) API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-043  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-044 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.9.7 Confirmation on screen of detail added about the dispenser type and nomination type The prescriber must confirm the nomination is correct before it is applied to a prescription. . Related docs:  . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-045 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.10 Add medication items to a prescription  . Related docs:  . Risk Logs:  . Requirement assessed by: 

1.10.1 Minimum and maximum medication items can be added to a prescription At least 1 but no more than 4 medication items must be added to a prescription.   This can be a mixture of medication and medical devices. . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service (EPS) prescribing developer guide - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-008 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-021 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.10.2 How medication should be listed to a prescription The dm+d "Virtual Medicinal Product Name" (VMP) or "Actual Medicinal Product Description" (AMP) and the associated dm+d code must be used to record medication prescribed using EPS.  Descriptions must use the correct uppercase and lowercase characters as defined in dm+d.  Do not prescribe at the dm+d pack level using VMPP or AMPP. Do not prescribe using the VTM concept. . Related docs: dm+d . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-PRI-001 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-020 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-049 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-050 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.10.3 Quanity and Unit of Measure (UoM) from dm+d must be added to each medication item in a prescription A quantity and dm+d unit of measure for each medication item must be provided.  Systems must format the quantity without trailing zeros. For example, Ò12.5Ó instead of Ò12.50Ó. . Related docs: dm+d . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-017 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-020 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-049 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-050 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.10.4 Quantity must be expressed in words When prescribing a Schedule 2 or 3 controlled drug, the quantity must also be expressed in words.  Prescribers must not be able to edit the quantity wording but can edit the numerical quantity. The quantity wording must then update, based on the numerical edit.  This applies to new prescriptions and reauthorisations of old repeat templates. . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service (EPS) prescribing developer guide - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-017 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-039 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-020 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-049 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-050 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.10.5 The use of dm+d name and unit of measure must be applied consistently across different records and interfaces The dm+d drug name and unit of measure, or equivalent mapped concepts, must be used consistently within:   * the application user interface  * patient medication records * or printed FP10s and prescription tokens . Related docs: dm+d . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-012 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.10.6 The Prescriber must be able to add the dosage instructions correctly Prescribed medication must contain dosage instructions expressed as a structured dose and text.  For medication, the prescriber must add structured dosage instructions by picking from a list.   Alternatively, the system can populate valid and clinically-safe dosage instructions.   If structured dosage isn't available on the medication item then typing by hand is allowed.  ÒUse as directedÓ should not be the generic default in a list as this is not clinically acceptable.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'structured dose' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-012 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-017 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-020 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-049 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-050 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.10.7 The dosage instructions should be added in a logical order on how the patient should take the medication over a period of time The visual representation of sequenced dosage instructions should clearly represent the order that they apply and be replicated within the structured dosage information in the prescription. . Related docs: Implementation guide for digital medicines . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-012 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-017 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-020 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-049 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-050 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.10.8 The system must use the most up to date version of dm+d The system must use a version of the dm+d that's as up to date as possible. It must be no more than 2 months old.   It is recommended to use the 'Terminology Server' to get dm+d source, alternatively dm+d updates are published every week on the Technology Reference Update Distribution (TRUD) website. . Related docs: Integrate your system with the NHS England Terminology Server - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-013 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.10.9 dm+d must be handled without string truncation All dm+d references must be handled without string truncation. String wrapping onto an extra line is allowed. . Related docs: dm+d . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-012  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-020 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-049 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-050 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.10.10 Other mapped concepts must follow the definition of "Native dm+d" Mapped concepts from another terminology service to dm+d must follow the definition of ÒNative dm+dÓ. . Related docs: dm+d . Risk Logs:  . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.10.11 Prescribers can add endorsements to medication items Prescribers must be able to add endorsements to a prescription medication item.  Specfic endorsement codes can be found in the endorsements vocabulary from the BSA. . Related docs: Requirements and Guidance for Endorsement in the Electronic Prescription Service (EPS) . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-037 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-038 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.10.13 A Community Practitioner Nurse Prescriber can only prescribe certain medication items Community Practitioner Nurse Prescribers can only prescribe products included in the Nurse PrescribersÕ Formulary for Community Practitioners (Part XVIIB(i) of the Drug Tariff). The medication which can be prescribed is flagged in dm+d at AMPP level.  The system must ensure that when a Community Nurse is prescribing using the "nn05" prescription type codes (for example "0105 Primary Care Prescriber - Community Practitioner Nurse Prescriber") that they can only prescribe these medications that are available to them.  There are no Community Practitioner Nurse Prescribers in Secondary Care. . Related docs: Further details on NPF . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-011 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-018 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.11 Create a 0002 Repeat Prescribing prescription (optional for Secondary Care Suppliers)  . Related docs:  . Risk Logs:  . Requirement assessed by: 

1.11.1 Prescribers adding a review date on 0002 Repeat Prescribing prescriptions Prescribers must specify the review date for 0002 Repeat Prescribing prescriptions.   This denotes when a repeat schedule must be reviewed by the prescriber.  See Helpful Documentation for information on what is required.  Note: This requirement isn't mandatory for Secondary Care Suppliers. Depending on your use case you may want to include Repeat Prescribing as available functionality to users accessing your system. . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service (EPS) prescribing developer guide - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-023 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.12 Create an 0003 eRD prescription - not applicable for Dispensing Doctors  (optional for Secondary Care Suppliers)  . Related docs:  . Risk Logs:  . Requirement assessed by: 

1.12.1 Schedule 2 and 3 controlled drugs cannot be prescribed to a 0003 Electronic Repeat Dispensing (eRD) prescription Schedule 2 and 3 controlled drugs must not be prescribed on a 0003 Electronic Repeat Dispensing (eRD) prescription.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'CommunicationRequest' by using CTRL+F  Note: This requirement isn't mandatory for Secondary Care Suppliers. Depending on your use case you may want to include eRDs as available functionality to users accessing your system. . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-039 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.12.2 Prescribers should specify the review date on a 0003 Electronic Repeat Dispensing (eRD) prescription Prescribers must specify the review date for 0003 Electronic Repeat Dispensing (eRD) prescriptions.   This denotes when a repeat schedule must be reviewed by the prescriber.  Note: This requirement isn't mandatory for Secondary Care Suppliers. Depending on your use case you may want to include eRDs as available functionality to users accessing your system. . Related docs: Electronic repeat dispensing - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-023 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.12.3 Items for 0003 Electronic Repeat Dispensing (eRD) can only be added to a prescription with other items that are also for eRD 0003 Electronic Repeat Dispensing (eRD) items must not be added to a prescription that contains 0001 Acute and / or 0002 Repeat Prescribing items.  Note: This requirement isn't mandatory for Secondary Care Suppliers. Depending on your use case you may want to include eRDs as available functionality to users accessing your system. . Related docs:  . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-018 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.12.4 Prescribers must be able to specify the number of issues and how long the 0003 Electronic Repeat Dispensing (eRD) prescription is valid for Prescribers must be able to specify the number of issues each item an 0003 Electronic Repeat Dispensing (eRD) prescription is valid for (this can be different for each item on the prescription).  Note: This requirement isn't mandatory for Secondary Care Suppliers. Depending on your use case you may want to include eRDs as available functionality to users accessing your system. . Related docs: Electronic repeat dispensing - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-023 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.12.5 Prescribers must be able to specify the duration that each medication item on a 0003 Electronic Repeat Dispensing (eRD) prescription must be consumed within Prescribers must be able to specify the expected duration that items on a 0003 Electronic Repeat Dispensing (eRD) prescription must be consumed within. Items on a prescription will all have the same duration.  The duration must be expressed in days.  Note: This requirement isn't mandatory for Secondary Care Suppliers. Depending on your use case you may want to include eRDs as available functionality to users accessing your system. . Related docs: Electronic repeat dispensing - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-023 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.12.6 Prescribers must specify the start date of a 0003 Electronic Repeat Dispensing (eRD) cycle Prescribers must be able to specify the start date of a 0003 Electronic Repeat Dispensing (eRD) cycle.   A valid start date must be included, which must be today's date or in the future.  Note: This requirement isn't mandatory for Secondary Care Suppliers. Depending on your use case you may want to include eRDs as available functionality to users accessing your system. . Related docs: Electronic repeat dispensing - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-023 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.12.7 How to calculate the 0003 Electronic Repeat Dispensing (eRD) cycle The default end date of a 0003 Electronic Repeat Dispensing (eRD) cycle must be calculated based on the item with the largest number of issues, multiplied by the duration of each issue.  For example, an eRD prescription which runs for 4 issues, that each have a duration of 28 days, will be valid for 112 days from the start date.   The end date of an eRD cycle cannot exceed 12 months.   Note: This requirement isn't mandatory for Secondary Care Suppliers. Depending on your use case you may want to include eRDs as available functionality to users accessing your system. . Related docs: Electronic repeat dispensing - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-PRI/SEC-001 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-PRI/SEC-002 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.13 Add additional instructions to a prescription or medication item  . Related docs:  . Risk Logs:  . Requirement assessed by: 

1.13.1 Adding instructions for the patient The prescriber must be able to specify additional instructions for the patient in a prescription.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'CommunicationRequest' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-019 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.13.2 Adding medication item instructions from prescriber to dispenser Prescribers must be able to specify additional instructions for a medication item. For example, they may need to explain changes in dosage.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'Specific additional instructions' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-019 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.13.3 Specifying last authorised repeat within repeat prescribing cycle Prescribers must specify when a prescribed medication item is the last authorised repeat within a repeat prescribing cycle.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'A structured list of repeat medication' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-019 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.13.4 The medication item(s) that are a repeat for the patient should be made apparent that they are repeat prescribing within the prescription The prescribing system must express all the authorised repeats a patient is on in a list on the prescription.  This is to support the patient in re-ordering repeat prescriptions, where relevant.  The list must include the medication's dm+d name and description. For example "Bendroflumethiazide 2.5 mg Tablets."  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'A structured list of repeat medication' by using CTRL+F  Note: This requirement isn't mandatory for Secondary Care Suppliers. Depending on your use case you may want to include Repeat Prescribing as part of prescriptions created from your system. . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-023 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.14 When a prescription might be rejected  . Related docs:  . Risk Logs:  . Requirement assessed by: 

1.14.1 How the system handles rejections from error codes supplied by the API The system must be able to handle a rejected prescription.   For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation. . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API Errors - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-034 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.15 Creating prescribing tokens  . Related docs:  . Risk Logs:  . Requirement assessed by: 

1.15.1 If a patient requires a token this must be available to print off upon request The prescriber must be able to print a prescribing token for a patient at the patient's request, or where the prescription does not have a nomination and no digital prescription token is available. . Related docs: Prescription and dispensing tokens - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-058 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.16 Enable prescribers to view relevant clinical information relating to prescriptions  . Related docs:  . Risk Logs:  . Requirement assessed by: 

1.16.1 Historic electronic prescriptions should be preserved indefinitely in the prescribing system Historic electronic prescriptions should be preserved indefinitely in the prescribing system. . Related docs:  . Risk Logs:  . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.16.2 Prescribers can use a search facility to find prescriptions by prescription ID There must be a search facility that lets prescribers find EPS prescriptions (this includes post-dated and past prescriptions) through an appropriate search criteria.   This applies to all prescription records, and includes:   * historic prescription records * prescriptions awaiting authorisation or electronic signing * cancelled prescriptions . Related docs:  . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-042 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

1.16.3 Prescribers must be able to see the prescription ID and copy it to their clipboard Prescribers must be able to see the prescription ID and copy it to their clipboard (for example, to be able to paste into the EPS Prescription Tracker). . Related docs:  . Risk Logs:  . Requirement assessed by: 

2.1.1 How the prescription data must be encoded The prescribing system must encode prescription data as a base-64 encoded digest before it is signed.  This can be achieved using the $prepare endpoint. . Related docs: EPS: How to embed a signature within a prescription . Risk Logs: Response in the SCAL required . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

2.1.2 When the prescription data must be encoded The prescribing system must only encode prescription data at the point where it is being signed.   There should be no delay, other than the time taken for the User to authenticate (e.g. enter PIN, biometrics check), between a prescription being encoded and the prescription being signed. . Related docs: EPS: How to embed a signature within a prescription . Risk Logs: Response in the SCAL required . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

2.1.3 Hashing algorithm The SHA-256 hashing algorithm is a minimum requirement. This is enforced by the $prepare endpoint. . Related docs:  . Risk Logs: Response in the SCAL required . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

2.2.1 Example of what should be on the non-repudiation screen Before a prescription is signed, a non-repudiation screen must be displayed.  The non-repudiation screen must display the prescription(s) being signed so that a prescriber can confirm that they are happy to authorise said prescription(s).  The non-repudiation screen must include information about the prescription.  This includes:  - the patient's family name, given name, prefix, date of birth, age (in years), gender, NHS number, address and postcode - the prescriber's name, code, prescribing code, orginsation name or cost centre name, ODS or cost centre code, address and postcode - the prescription start date - the nomination organisation name, ODS code, address and postcode - the medication drug name, endorsements, quantity, quantity in words (where appropriate i.e. sched 2/3 CD's), unit of measure, dosage, notes and patient communication text - the Content Commitment Declaration (an example of this could be,The system will sign the content displayed here on your behalf, as an Advanced Electronic Signature. By re-authenticating with your NHS provisioned CIS2 authenticator, you confirm your intention to digitally sign and issue this electronic prescription).  See Helpful Documentation for information on what is required. . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service (EPS) prescribing developer guide - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-029  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-032 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

2.2.2 The prompt must make the commitment clear The prompt displayed to the signer must include text to be defined by the authority that makes the commitment clear. . Related docs:  . Risk Logs:  . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

2.2.3 The prompt must have proceed and cancel options The prompt must provide clear options that allow the signer to proceed or cancel. . Related docs:  . Risk Logs:  . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

2.2.4 When the non-repudiation screen should be presented The prescribing system must ensure that a prescriber cannot proceed to sign a prescription until they have read the entire non-repudiation screen.   Continue or sign buttons must only be available once the prescriber has scrolled to view the whole non-repudiation screen and prescription information.  See Helpful Documentation for information on what is required. . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service (EPS) prescribing developer guide - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-029 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

2.3.1 The Digital Signature Service API is the only method to sign prescriptions The Digital Signature Service API must be used to sign prescriptions. . Related docs: Digital Signature Service API . Risk Logs: Response in the SCAL required . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

2.3.2 The prescribing system must enable signing via authenticators from CIS2 Authentication that correspond to NIST AAL3 Signing must be enabled through CIS2 Authentication at AAL3 level. For example, security keys, iPads, Windows Hello and Smartcards.  Microsoft Authenticator is not a strong enough cryptographic link to be an Advanced Signature. . Related docs: CIS 2 Authentication . Risk Logs: Response in the SCAL required . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

2.3.3 The 'Requester' is the only person who can sign the prescription Only the Practitioner stated as the Requester in the FHIR payload - as per requirement 2.2.1 - must be able to encode, sign, and submit it to Spine. . Related docs: Digital Signatures . Risk Logs: Response in the SCAL required . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

2.3.4 The signing algorithm in the $prepare response should be used to send to the Digital Signature Service The prescribing system must use the signing algorithm returned by the $prepare response to send to the Digital Signature Service. . Related docs: Digital Signature Service API . Risk Logs: Response in the SCAL required . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

2.3.5 There should be a prompt before signing a message Before signing a message the system must prompt the user to affirm that they wish to proceed. . Related docs:  . Risk Logs:  . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

2.4.1 The system must enable multiple prescriptions to be signed in a single operation Prescribers must be able to sign multiple prescriptions at once. . Related docs: Digital Signatures . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-030 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

2.4.2 A non-repudiation screen must be present before signing As per requirement 2.2.1, prescribers must be shown non-repudiation information of all the prescriptions in a batch before encoding and submitting them to the Digital Signature Service. . Related docs: Digital Signatures . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-030 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

2.4.3 Maximum 250 prescriptions can be signed in a single operation Prescribers must not be able to sign more than 250 prescriptions at once. . Related docs: Digital Signatures . Risk Logs: Digital Signature Service risk log . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

2.4.4 Commitment dialogue must display for bulk signing The overall commitment dialogue must comply with requirements 2.2.1 - 2.2.4 . Related docs:  . Risk Logs:  . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

2.4.5 A freshly entered PIN must be used for bulk signing A freshly entered PIN must be used for each new bulk signing operation. . Related docs:  . Risk Logs:  . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

2.4.6 PIN storage and processing must be overwritten Immediately after use, memory locations that the system used to store or process the PIN should be overwritten . Related docs:  . Risk Logs:  . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

2.4.7 PINs should not be included in trace files or audit logs Ensure that the PIN is not included in trace files or audit logs that the system generates. . Related docs:  . Risk Logs:  . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

2.5.1 The signature must be added to each individual prescription before being sent to Spine Generated signatures must be added to the prescription before the prescription can be submitted to the $process-message endpoint (sent to Spine). . Related docs: https://digital.nhs.uk/services/electronic-prescription-service/guidance-for-developers/how-to-embed-a-signature-within-a-prescription . Risk Logs: Digital Signature Service risk log . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

3.1.1 Cancel medication items The prescribing system must be able to cancel individual or all medication items on prescriptions that have been sent to (and are still stored) Spine. . Related docs: Cancelling an electronic prescription - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-057 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

3.1.2 Post-dated prescriptions should be visible If post-dated prescriptions are created and have not been downloaded by the dispenser, the system should make them visible and give the Prescriber the option to cancel them if they need to. . Related docs: Cancelling an electronic prescription - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs:  . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

3.1.3 Cancel future eRD issues which have not been downloaded The prescribing system must be able to cancel future eRD issues which are still stored in Spine. All issues are cancelled as a whole, it is not possible to cancel future issues individually.   The Clinician should check the Prescription Tracker to find the details of future instances on eRDs.  Note: This requirement isn't mandatory for Secondary Care Suppliers. Depending on your use case you may want to include eRDs as part of prescriptions created from your system. . Related docs: https://digital.nhs.uk/services/electronic-prescription-service/eps-clinical-prescription-tracker . Risk Logs:  . Requirement assessed by: 

3.2.1 Cancellation reasons The user must provide a cancellation reason code. This must be in line with the given list of cancellation reasons.  For the list of cancellation reasons select the link in helpful documentation. . Related docs: uk.nhsdigital.r4.test | MedicationRequest Status Reason - SIMPLIFIER.NET . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-050 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

3.3.1 What the Requerster is on a cancellation The requester of a cancellation request is the individual who is cancelling the prescription.   To make a cancellation request, the requester must be authorised to do so with the correct cancellation RBAC access code.   They may be different to the prescriber who was the requester on the original prescription. . Related docs: Cancelling an electronic prescription - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-002  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-003 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

3.3.2 Requester's SDS role profile ID The cancel request must contain the Requester's SDS role profile ID.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'The prescriber or dispenser's SDS Role Profile ID' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-049  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-050 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

3.3.3 Requester's SDS job role code The cancel request must contain the Requester's SDS job role code.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'The SDS job role code for a given prescriber or dispenser' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-049  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-051 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

3.3.4 Requester's name The cancel request must have the name of the Requester.  This is taken from the original prescription.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'The prescriber's name.' by using CTRL+F . Related docs:  . Risk Logs:  . Requirement assessed by: 

3.3.5 Requester's telecom details The cancel request must have the Requester's telephone number, which is the only supported telecom method.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'the telephone number of a given prescriber or dispenser' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-049  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-050 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

3.3.6 Requester's SDS user identifier The cancel request must contain the Requester's SDS user identifier.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'SDS User Identifier' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-049  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-052 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

3.4.1 What the Responsible Practitioner is on a cancellation The Responsible Practitioner's details on a cancellation request must always be the prescriber who was the requester and signed the original prescription. . Related docs: Cancelling an electronic prescription - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-049  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-050 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

3.4.2 Responsible Practitioner's SDS role profile ID The cancel request must contain the Responsible Practitioner's SDS role profile ID.  This is taken from the original prescription.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'The prescriber or dispenser's SDS Role Profile ID' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-049  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-050 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

3.4.3 Responsible Practitioner's SDS job role code The cancel request must contain the Responsible Practitioner's SDS job role code.  This is taken from the original prescription.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'The SDS job role code for a given prescriber or dispenser' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-049  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-051 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

3.4.4 Responsible Practitioner's telecom details The cancel request must have the Responsible Practitioner's telephone number, which is the only supported telecom method.  This is taken from the original prescription.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'the telephone number of a given prescriber or dispenser' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-049  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-050 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

3.4.5 Responsible Practioner's name The cancel request must have the name of the Responsible Practioner.  This is taken from the original prescription.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'The prescriber's name.' by using CTRL+F . Related docs:  . Risk Logs:  . Requirement assessed by: 

3.4.6 Responsible Practitioner's SDS user identifier The cancel request must contain the Responsible Practitioner's SDS user identifier.  This is taken from the original prescription.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'SDS User Identifier' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-049  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-052 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

3.5.1 Prescribing Organistion's ODS Code The cancel request must have the prescribing organisation's ODS code.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'An array containing the ODS code of the organisation' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-049  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-050 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

3.5.2 Prescribing Organistion's name The cancel request must have the prescribing organisation's name.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'Organisation name' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-049 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-050 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

3.5.3 Prescribing Organisation's address The cancel request must have the prescribing organisation's address.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'Organisation address' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-049  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-050 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

3.5.4 Prescribing Organisation's telephone number The cancel request must have the prescribing organisation's telephone number, which is the only supported telecom method.   For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation and search 'telephone number associated with the organisation' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-049  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-050 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

3.6.1 Patient's NHS Number must be in the cancellation request The cancellation request must have the patient's NHS number.  This is taken from the original prescription.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'The patient's NHS number' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-049  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-050 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

3.6.2 Patient's name must be in the cancellation request The cancellation request must have the patient's usual name only.  This is taken from the original prescription.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'The patient's name' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-049  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-050 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

3.6.3 Patient's gender must be in the cancellation request The cancellation request must have the patient's gender.  This is taken from the original prescription.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'gender of a patient' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-049  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-050 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

3.6.4 Patient's date of birth must be in the cancellation request The cancellation request must have the patient's date of birth.  This is taken from the original prescription.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'The date on which the patient was born' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-049  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-050 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

3.6.5 Patient's address must be in the cancellation request The cancellation request must have the patient's home or temporary address only.  This is taken from the original prescription.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'The patient's address' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-049  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-050 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

3.6.6 Patients registered general practice (not practitioner) must be in the cancellation request The prescription must have the ODS code of the general practice the patient is registered with.  This is taken from the original prescription.  For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'general practice' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-049  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-050 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

3.7.1 How the system handles a successful or unsuccessful cancel response A successful or unsuccessful cancel response must be received and handled for each medication item on the prescription that is being cancelled.  For a full list of cancel response codes and display values, see the helpful documentation. . Related docs: uk.nhsdigital.r4.test | MedicationRequest Status Reason History - SIMPLIFIER.NET . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-051 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-052 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-053 - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-054 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

3.7.2 When a subsequent cancellation has been recieved you must query the a Prescription Tracker API to reflect the overall prescription status When you receive a suqsequent cancellation you must query the Prescription Tracker API to update the overall prescription status.  If all items of the prescription are being cancelled, the overall status of the prescription must be reflected alongside the received cancel responses to aid clinical decision making. . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service Tracker - REST API . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-055 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

3.7.3 The Prescriber must be able to understand where the prescription is along the prescription journey The user who requested the cancellation must be able to see information about the dispenser where this is provided as part of the cancellation response. For example, where a cancellation is unsuccessful as a result of the prescription being with a dispenser.  This is so they can contact the dispenser about the prescription.   For information on what is required, select the link in helpful documentation, select 'Schema' and search 'Details of the dispenser who downloaded the prescription' by using CTRL+F . Related docs: Electronic Prescription Service - FHIR API - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-054 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

3.8.1 The canceller should be told a subsequent cancellation has been successful and prescribers must be notified when a subsequent cancel response is received A subsequent cancel response is received when a prescription has been returned to Spine by a dispenser.   At this point, any pending cancellation requests will successfully cancel the prescription or medication item and a subsequent cancellation response will be received from Spine.  Prescribers must be notified when the subsequent cancellation response is received. . Related docs: Cancelling an electronic prescription - NHS England Digital . Risk Logs:  . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

3.8.2 Subsequent cancellation responses are managed by a MESH mailbox set up Subsequent cancellation responses must be received by a MESH mailbox registered against the following workflow group EPSFHIRR4prescriber, using the following workflow ID: HL7FHIR_R4_PRESCRIPTION_ORDER_RESPONSE . Related docs: Message Exchange for Social Care and Health (MESH) . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-056 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

3.8.3 How the cancellation must be handled A subsequent cancellation response must be received and handled for each medication item on the prescription that is being cancelled.  For a full list of cancel response codes and display values, see the helpful documentation. . Related docs: uk.nhsdigital.r4.test | MedicationRequest Status Reason History - SIMPLIFIER.NET . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-056 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

3.9.1 How an incoming system should behave when a system is migrating to a new one for cancellations As an incoming system migrating from an outgoing system, you must be able to use the data migration extract that was created and issued by the outgoing system to:  * submit a cancellation request * handle cancellation responses * print a prescription token  For HL7V3 migrations to FHIR, pending cancellations will not receive subsequent cancellations in the new FHIR system.  See helpful documentation for data migration extract. . Related docs: EPS-Prescribing-System-MVP-Non-Functional-Specification-v0.4.pdf (developer-test.nhs.uk) . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-057 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

3.9.2 How a outgoing system should behave when a system is migrating to a new one for cancellations As an outgoing system you must include the EPS data outlined in section 3.9.1 when a system change is happening and data is being migrated to an incoming system. . Related docs:  . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:   - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-059 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

4.1.1 Cancellation of 0003 Electronic Repeat Dispensing (eRD) prescriptions during a patient deduction transaction For Primary Care Suppliers only  0003 Electronic Repeat Dispensing (eRD) prescriptions that are still valid or post-dated must be cancelled if a:  * GP2GP request is accepted by the system * deduction transaction from a local NHIAS system is accepted * manual high-security deduction is accepted  A cancellation message must be submitted and responses processed. The prescriber must be told that the prescription is cancelled or deleted after this process.   For Secondary Care Suppliers only  0003 Electronic Repeat Dispensing (eRD) prescriptions that are still valid or post-dated must be cancelled if there is a:  * transfer of patient care to a different site * different care provider  A cancellation message must be submitted and responses processed. The prescriber must be told that the prescription is cancelled or deleted after this process. . Related docs:  . Risk Logs: Connecting Systems Risk Log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-057 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

4.2.1 The system must generate a report for all EPS R2 prescriptions by practice The system must generate an electronic report, like a spreadsheet. The report must be for all EPS R2 electronic prescriptions generated by the practice in a given date and time range.  The report must be available for end users to generate and use.  It must contain the prescription:  * ID * authorisation date and time * submission date and time * treatment type (0001 Acute, 0002 repeat or 0003 eRD)  The report must also contain the patient's:  * NHS number * name * date of birth . Related docs:  . Risk Logs: Connecting systems risk log:  - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-042 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

4.2.2 The system must generate a report for all 0003 Electronic Repeat Dispensing (eRD) prescriptions by practice The system must generate an electronic report, like a spreadsheet, on active 0003 Electronic Repeat Dispensing (eRD) prescriptions issued by the practice. The report must be available to the user to generate and use.  Prescriptions classed as 'active' must be based on the algorithm:  TodayÕs Date < Prescription Date + (Number of Authorised Issues * Expected Duration)  For each active eRD prescription, the report must include the:  * prescription ID * patient's NHS number * patient's name * patient's date of birth * prescription authorisation date * number of authorised issues * expected duration of each issue in days . Related docs:  . Risk Logs: Connecting systems risk log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-042 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test

4.2.3 A user must be able to see where the prescription is in within the prescribing workflow Users can see where prescriptions are in the EPS workflow on the prescribing system.  The workflow must include:  * awaiting signing by prescriber * post-dated and submitted to EPS * submitted to EPS * rejected by EPS * cancelled * cancellation rejected by EPS . Related docs:  . Risk Logs: Connecting systems risk log: - EPSFHIR-PRESC-GEN-042 . Requirement assessed by: Clinical Witness Test
